.\" Copyright (C) 1997-1999, 2003, 2004, 2017-2018 Ossama Othman
.\"
.\"   Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
.\"   document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
.\"   Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
.\"   Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and
.\"   no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
.\"   section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".

.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii marc.1
.\"
.TH MARC 1 "2018-07-02" "MaRC" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
marc \- create digital map projections
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY marc
.OP \-?V
.OP \-\-help
.OP \-\-usage
.OP \-\-version
.IR FILE .\|.\|.
.YS

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B marc
(Map Reprojections and Conversions) is a program designed to produce
maps from digital images or from computed values of incidence,
emission or phase angles, and latitudes and longitudes.  Multi-plane
maps can be created with digital image data in several planes and
cosines of incidence, emission, and phase angles, as well as latitudes
and longitudes in other planes.  Placement of data in a given plane is
completely arbitrary.  The user decides in what plane to place a given
set of data.  Created maps are stored in FITS (Flexible Image
Transport System) format.

Input
.IR FILE s
provided on the
.B marc
command line describe the body being mapped, observer viewing
geometry, source data, and map characteristics.  Multiple
.IR FILE s
may be specified, causing
.B marc
to process each of them.  See the
.B MaRC_input
manual for a description
of the
.B marc
input file format.

.B marc
supports the following options:
.TP
.B -?, --help
give this help list
.TP
.B --usage
give a short usage message
.TP
.B -V, --version
print program version

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.marc
User configuration file. See the
.B MaRC_input
manual for further details.

.SH BUGS
Conformal and equivalent projections have not been well tested or
verified.

Report bugs on the
.UR https://github.com/ossama-othman/MaRC/issues
MaRC issues page
.UE .
